[DO] Adding "Concepts" node, adding "DO Lifecycle" chapter (#23823)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/durable-objects/concepts/durable-object-lifecycle.mdx

---
title: The Lifecycle of a Durable Object
pcx_content_type: concept
sidebar:
  order: 3

---

import { Render, TypeScriptExample } from "~/components";

This section describes the lifecycle of a [Durable Object](/durable-objects/concepts/what-are-durable-objects/).

To use a Durable Object you need to create a [Durable Object Stub](/durable-objects/api/stub/). In its simplest form, this looks like the following snippet:

```ts
// Assume a DurableObjectNamespace binding MY_DURABLE_OBJECT
// Every unique ID refers to an individual instance of the Durable Object class
const id = env.MY_DURABLE_OBJECT.idFromName("foo");
const stub = env.MY_DURABLE_OBJECT.get(id);
```

Once we have the Durable Object Stub, we can now invoke methods on the Durable Object. Note that the above two lines does not yet send any request to the remote Durable Object.

The following line invokes the `sayHello()` method of the Durable Object class bound to the `MY_DURABLE_OBJECT` binding:

```ts
// All invoked methods need to be awaited.
const rpcResponse = await stub.sayHello();
```

> At this point, the caller sends a request to the Durable Object identified by the stub. The lifecycle of the Durable Object now begins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the caller sends a request to the Durable Object identified by the stub. The lifecycle of the Durable Object begins.
```

## Durable Object Lifecycle state transitions

> A Durable Object can be in one of the following states at any moment:

Reviewer: Do a pass of the text and make sure the states are consistently referred to, either lowercased/uppercased, or bold, etc.

| Active in-memory                  | The Durable Object runs, in memory, and handles incoming requests.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Idle in-memory non-hibernateable  | The Durable Object waits for the next incoming request/event, but does not satisfy the criteria for hibernation.                                                                                                                                      |
| Idle in-memory hibernateable      | The Durable Object waits for the next incoming request/event and satisfies the criteria for hibernation. It is up to the runtime to decide when to hibernate the Durable Object. Currently, it is after 10 seconds of inactivity while in this state. |
| Hibernated                        | The Durable Object is removed from memory.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

> | Evicted                           | The Durable Object is completely removed from the host process. Might need a cold start.                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer: The new diagram changed this.

```suggestion
| Inactive                           | The Durable Object is completely removed from the host process. Might need a cold start.                                                                                                                                                              |
```

---
title: The Lifecycle of a Durable Object
pcx_content_type: concept
sidebar:
  order: 3

---

import { Render, TypeScriptExample } from "~/components";

This section describes the lifecycle of a [Durable Object](/durable-objects/concepts/what-are-durable-objects/).

To use a Durable Object you need to create a [Durable Object Stub](/durable-objects/api/stub/). In its simplest form, this looks like the following snippet:

```ts
// Assume a DurableObjectNamespace binding MY_DURABLE_OBJECT
// Every unique ID refers to an individual instance of the Durable Object class
const id = env.MY_DURABLE_OBJECT.idFromName("foo");
const stub = env.MY_DURABLE_OBJECT.get(id);
```

Once we have the Durable Object Stub, we can now invoke methods on the Durable Object. Note that the above two lines do not yet send any request to the remote Durable Object.

> The following line invokes the `sayHello()` method of the Durable Object class bound to the `MY_DURABLE_OBJECT` binding:

Reviewer 2: - mention that `sayHello` is a RPC method
- link to https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/best-practices/create-durable-object-stubs-and-send-requests/#invoke-rpc-methods

```ts
// All invoked methods need to be awaited.
const rpcResponse = await stub.sayHello();
```

At this point, the caller sends a request to the Durable Object identified by the stub. The lifecycle of the Durable Object begins.

## Durable Object Lifecycle state transitions

A Durable Object can be in one of the following states at any moment:

| State                                | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **Active in-memory**                 | The Durable Object runs, in memory, and handles incoming requests.                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Add `,` to match the cards in the diagram so `active, in-memory`, `idle, in-memory, hibernateable`

| **Idle in-memory non-hibernateable** | The Durable Object waits for the next incoming request/event, but does not satisfy the criteria for hibernation.                                                                                                                                      |
| **Idle in-memory hibernateable**     | The Durable Object waits for the next incoming request/event and satisfies the criteria for hibernation. It is up to the runtime to decide when to hibernate the Durable Object. Currently, it is after 10 seconds of inactivity while in this state. |

> | **Hibernated**                       | The Durable Object is removed from memory.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Hibernated**                       | The Durable Object is removed from memory. Hibernated WebSocket connections stay connected.                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
```

> | **Inactive**                         | The Durable Object is completely removed from the host process. Might need a cold start. This is the initial state of all Durable Objects.                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Inactive**                         | The Durable Object is completely removed from the host process and might need to cold start. This is the initial state of all Durable Objects.                                                                                                                                                              |
```

This is how a Durable Object transitions among these states (each state is in a rounded rectangle).

![Lifecycle of a Durable Object](~/assets/images/durable-objects/lifecycle-of-a-do.png)

> Assuming a Durable Object does not run, the first incoming request or event (like an Alarm) will execute the `constructor()` of the Durable Object class, then run the corresponding function invoked.

Reviewer 2: lowercase `Alarm`

In case of an incoming request or event while in the hibernated state, the `constructor()` will run again, and the corresponding function invoked will run.

While in the idle in-memory non-hibernateable state, after 70-140 seconds of inactivity (no incoming requests or events), the Durable Object will be evicted entirely from memory and potentially from the Cloudflare host and transition to the inactive state.

> Objects in the hibernated state keep their Websocket clients connected, and the runtime decides it will ever move the object to a different host, thus restarting the lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objects in the hibernated state keep their Websocket clients connected, and the runtime decides if and when to move the object to a different host, thus restarting the lifecycle.
```

Sorry, typo in my previous comment. Feel free to rephrase that part.
